[WIP] docs: add General Technical Review (#56)
kubewarden/community: general-technical-questions.md

### How to use this template

Make a copy of the template below and answer questions related to your project level to the best of your ability.
_**Not every question will be addressable or relevant to every project.**_
If this is the case for your project, please mark it as not-applicable (N/A) and provide a brief explanation.

**NOTE:** The questions are cumulative e.g. if you are applying for incubation or graduation, you should answer both day 0 and day 1 questions etc.

#### Tips

- Treat the GTR questionnaire as a living document and keep a copy of it in your project's own repo. The GTR questions are helpful to both contributors and users and will make updating it in the future less work when you want to apply to move levels.
- Answer more questions than the requirement for your level if it _makes sense for your project_. e.g. if you have documentation covering the different forms of observability in the Day-2 requirements.
- You **CAN** link out to your own project's documentation, but be sure to link to it in a _versioned_ form. e.g. link to it at a specific commit instead of the `main` branch, or versioned website.

> - A recorded demo or diagram(s) may be easier to convey some of the concepts in the questions below. You may provide a link to a recorded demo or add architectural diagrams along with your GTR questionnaire.

Reviewer: I think we need a updated version of the demo. In the Robert quickstart demo there is no  crd installation. It's all installed in the controller chart. So, it's pretty old.

> - A recorded demo or diagram(s) may be easier to convey some of the concepts in the questions below. You may provide a link to a recorded demo or add architectural diagrams along with your GTR questionnaire.

Reviewer 2: Agree, we should record an updated demo.

> - A recorded demo or diagram(s) may be easier to convey some of the concepts in the questions below. You may provide a link to a recorded demo or add architectural diagrams along with your GTR questionnaire.

Author: added in the installation section

- If you are unsure or have a question about any section below, **please ask**. Chances are you're not the only one with a question and the template should be updated with additional guidance.

---

# General Technical Review - Kubewarden / Sandbox

- **Project:** Kubewarden
- **Project Version:** 1.24.0
- **Website:** https://kubewarden.io
- **Date Updated:** 2025-04-24
- **Template Version:** v1.0
- **Description:** Kubewarden is a universal policy engine for Kubernetes. Its mission is simplifying the adoption of policy-as-code and it aims to be the Universal Policy Engine for Kubernetes.

## Day 0 - Planning Phase

### Scope

- Describe the roadmap process, how scope is determined for mid to long term features, as well as how the roadmap maps back to current contributions and maintainer ladder?

>   The roadmap is determined by the maintainers and contributors of the project. It is a collaborative process that involves discussions and feedback from the community. The milestones are tracked via GitHub milestones and visible in the [Kubewarden's GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/kubewarden/projects/6/views/12).

Reviewer: Some months ago I've sent an email to CNCF folks asking about roadmap best practices. They replied to me that they do not have any specific. But pointed that they are thinking about [that](https://github.com/cncf/tag-contributor-strategy/issues/628). As well as mentioned the [containerd](https://containerd.io/roadmap/) roadmap documentation as a good example

>   The roadmap is determined by the maintainers and contributors of the project. It is a collaborative process that involves discussions and feedback from the community. The milestones are tracked via GitHub milestones and visible in the [Kubewarden's GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/kubewarden/projects/6/views/12).

Reviewer 2: Right now we only have a [community/README.md section](https://github.com/kubewarden/community?tab=readme-ov-file#roadmap), which is linkable. Expanding that or providing a new file sounds good.

- Describe the target persona or user(s) for the project?
  The documented target personas for Kubewarden are available at: https://docs.kubewarden.io/personas
- Explain the primary use case for the project. What additional use cases are supported by the project?
  Use cases are documented here: https://docs.kubewarden.io/#use-cases
- Explain which use cases have been identified as unsupported by the project.

>   N/A

Reviewer 2: We could list or link to the self-security assessment on non-goals: https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#non-goals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden doesn't intend to:

  - Replace Kubernetes built-in security features, but complement them:
    - We provide migration from PSPs.
    - One can re-use ValidatingAdmissionPolicies and CEL policies with our
    `cel-policy`.
    - Kubewarden policies can be mutating, while Pod Security Admission cannot.
    - Kubewarden policies benefit from the Kubewarden stack features (audit
    scanner, telemetry, CRD management).
  - Provide runtime security like intrusion detection or runtime container
    isolation.
  - Provide host system protection of clusters.
  - Provide infinite policy execution flexibility. To prevent DoS attacks,
    policies' processing times are limited.
```

- Describe the intended types of organizations who would benefit from adopting this project. (i.e. financial services, any software manufacturer, organizations providing platform engineering services)?
  Enterprise organizations, startups, SaaS provides, regulated industries, financial services and any organization running Kubernetes at scale.
- Please describe any completed end user research and link to any reports.
  N/A

### Usability

> - How should the target personas interact with your project?

Reviewer 2: I believe this would be a good point to link to the self-security assessment case studies: https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#adopters-and-case-studies

I will migrate the case studies to docs.kubewarden.io and then open a suggestion to link them here.

Author: I've added the link to the use cases page below the question: *"Explain the primary use case for the project. What additional use cases are supported by the project?"*  

In this section, I'm simply listing the available interaction methods with Kubewarden (CLI, Helm, CRDs), without describing specific use cases.

|                                                                      | Verification of OCI artifacts within policy logic.                                                      | https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/spec/host-capabilities/signature-verifier-policies   |
| [ArgoCD](https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd)                        | ArgoCD integration.                                                                                     | https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/argocd-installation                                     |
| [Rancher UI Extension](https://github.com/rancher/kubewarden-ui)     | Integrate Kubewarden into Rancher Manager’s UI as a global extension for policy management.             | https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/ui-extension/install                                    |
| [Rancher Fleet Example](https://github.com/kubewarden/fleet-example) | Deploy and manage Kubewarden charts across fleets of clusters using GitOps workflows via Rancher Fleet. | https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/Rancher-Fleet                                           |

### Design

- Explain the design principles and best practices the project is following.

> - Outline or link to the project’s architecture requirements? Describe how they differ for Proof of Concept, Development, Test and Production environments, as applicable.

Reviewer 2: The [actors](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#actors) and [actions](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#actions) of the self-security-assessment may explain this altogether.

- Define any specific service dependencies the project relies on in the cluster.

> - Describe how the project implements Identity and Access Management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Describe how the project implements Identity and Access Management.

The project relies on the native Kubernetes [RBAC](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#rbac) feature to control what each component can access. Because Kubewarden policies can access resources within the [cluster](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/context-aware-policies), access control is implemented individually for each policy server, which serves as the engine where the policies are executed. Therefore, different policy servers running distinct sets of policies can have varying access permissions. Furthermore, policies must explicitly declare the resources they intend to access; all other resources are blocked by default. Additionally, policies have read-only access to these declared resources.

The same principle applies to the [audit scanner](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/audit-scanner), which audits the running resources in the cluster. Cluster operators can also define the service account used by the audit scanner to perform cluster-wide scans.
```

- Describe how the project has addressed sovereignty.
- Describe any compliance requirements addressed by the project.
- Describe the project’s High Availability requirements.

> - Describe the project’s resource requirements, including CPU, Network and Memory.

Reviewer: I do not think we require too much resources to have a decent performance. But I do not remember us documented the minimum required resources for the stack.

> - Describe the project’s storage requirements, including its use of ephemeral and/or persistent storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Describe the project’s storage requirements, including its use of ephemeral and/or persistent storage.

The Kubewarden project's application components are stateless. Their storage requirements primarily revolve around ephemeral storage for runtime data processing.

On startup, each component loads all necessary configuration and sensitive information from Kubernetes ConfigMaps and Secrets, which are mounted as files within the pod. During runtime, any processed data is temporarily stored within ephemeral volumes, such as `emptyDir` volumes or directly in memory. These storage options are tied to the lifecycle of the pod and are discarded when the pod is terminated.

The project does not have any requirements for persistent storage for its core application components. All data needed for operation is either provided through configuration or is transient and managed within the pod's ephemeral storage.
```

Reviewer: Of course this gonna change after the implementation of the https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/issues/1019. But for now, I think this can be a good starting point to this question.

  Use cases are documented here: https://docs.kubewarden.io/#use-cases

- Explain which use cases have been identified as unsupported by the project.

  Kubewarden doesn't intend to:

  - Replace Kubernetes built-in security features, but complement them:
    - We provide migration from PSPs.
    - One can re-use ValidatingAdmissionPolicies and CEL policies with our
      `cel-policy`.
    - Kubewarden policies can be mutating, while Pod Security Admission cannot.
    - Kubewarden policies benefit from the Kubewarden stack features (audit
      scanner, telemetry, CRD management).
  - Provide runtime security like intrusion detection or runtime container
    isolation.
  - Provide host system protection of clusters.
  - Provide infinite policy execution flexibility. To prevent DoS attacks,
    policies' processing times are limited.

- Describe the intended types of organizations who would benefit from adopting this project. (i.e. financial services, any software manufacturer, organizations providing platform engineering services)?

  Enterprise organizations, startups, SaaS provides, regulated industries, financial services and any organization running Kubernetes at scale.

> - Please describe any completed end user research and link to any reports.

Author: @davideiori1 Maybe you could help with this

Author: added a TBD

- You **CAN** link out to your own project's documentation, but be sure to link to it in a _versioned_ form. e.g. link to it at a specific commit instead of the `main` branch, or versioned website.
- A recorded demo or diagram(s) may be easier to convey some of the concepts in the questions below. You may provide a link to a recorded demo or add architectural diagrams along with your GTR questionnaire.
- If you are unsure or have a question about any section below, **please ask**. Chances are you're not the only one with a question and the template should be updated with additional guidance.

---

# General Technical Review - Kubewarden / Sandbox

- **Project:** Kubewarden
- **Project Version:** 1.24.0
- **Website:** https://kubewarden.io
- **Date Updated:** 2025-04-24
- **Template Version:** v1.0
- **Description:** Kubewarden is a universal policy engine for Kubernetes. Its mission is simplifying the adoption of policy-as-code and it aims to be the Universal Policy Engine for Kubernetes.

## Day 0 - Planning Phase

### Scope

> - Describe the roadmap process, how scope is determined for mid to long term features, as well as how the roadmap maps back to current contributions and maintainer ladder?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Describe the roadmap process, how scope is determined for mid to long term features, as well as how the roadmap maps back to current contributions and the maintainer ladder?
```

Author: this comes directly from the  CNCF template

  Information about our roadmap process is available in the [ROADMAP.md](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/ROADMAP.md) document in the community repository.

> 

Reviewer 3: Is 'ladder' the term CNCF use?

```suggestion

The maintainer ladder is at [MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)

```

Author: Yes, *ladder* is a CNCF term referring to the different tiers of maintainers. While we don't have dedicated documentation on the ladder, the `MAINTAINERS.md` file includes a section that outlines the distinction between "Core Maintainer" and "Maintainer," which should be sufficient.

- Describe the target persona or user(s) for the project?

  The documented target personas for Kubewarden are available at: https://docs.kubewarden.io/personas

- Explain the primary use case for the project. What additional use cases are supported by the project?

  Use cases are documented here: https://docs.kubewarden.io/#use-cases

- Explain which use cases have been identified as unsupported by the project.

>   Kubewarden doesn't intend to:

Reviewer 3: This (kubewarden doesn't) might make a nice section on the landing page. WDYT? I'll make an issue if deemed a good thing. Then this doc can also link to it, like the use cases immediately prior.

Author: We could add the non-goals to the use case page added here: https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/593. I would avoid having anything negative in the landing page, i.e., stating what "kubewarden doesn't do".

Author: Added issue here: https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/issues/602

  and [host monthly community meetings](https://teamup.com/ks2bj74dvw132mhjtj).

  5. **Comprehensive, Versioned Documentation**

  Provide Quickstarts, Tutorials, Howtos, API references, and upgrade guides all pinned to specific releases so users always view docs matching their software version in [docs.kubewarden.io](https://docs.kubewarden.io).

  6. **Secure Software Supply Chain (SLSA Compliance)**

  Build pipelines generate SPDX SBOMs and SLSA provenance attestations for every Wasm module, container image, and Helm chart.
  All artifacts are signed with Sigstore’s Cosign and published alongside attestations—enabling fully automated, end-to-end verification of artifact integrity and origin.

  See [Verifying Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/tutorials/verifying-kubewarden) and [the SLSA level 3 blogpost](https://www.kubewarden.io/blog/2024/11/kubewarden-1-18-release-slsa-level-3/) for more details.

- Outline or link to the project’s architecture requirements? Describe how they differ for Proof of Concept, Development, Test and Production environments, as applicable.

> - Define any specific service dependencies the project relies on in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define any specific service dependencies the project relies on in the cluster.

The service dependencies within the cluster depends upon the features the user enables during Kubewarden installation. By default, a vanilla Kubewarden installation does not introduce any external dependencies beyond Kubernetes itself and an OCI registry to store the container images and Kubewarden policies.

However, if the user chooses to enable telemetry and tracing functionalities, the installation will require OpenTelemetry, Jaeger, and Prometheus. Similarly, to enable a web UI for visualizing audit scanner results, the OpenReport reporter will be installed.

Comprehensive documentation for these optional dependencies is available at the following links:

- [Open Telemetry quick start | Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/telemetry/opentelemetry-qs)
- [Tracing installation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/telemetry/tracing-qs)
- [Metrics installation | Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/telemetry/metrics-qs)
- [Audit Scanner UI](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/audit-scanner#policy-reporter-ui-optional)
- [Dependency matrix | Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/dependency-matrix)
```

Author: merged with my answer

- Describe how the project implements Identity and Access Management.

  The project relies on the native Kubernetes [RBAC](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#rbac) feature to control what each component can access.
  Because Kubewarden policies can access resources within the [cluster](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/context-aware-policies), access control is implemented individually for each policy server, which serves as the engine where the policies are executed.
  Therefore, different policy servers running distinct sets of policies can have varying access permissions.
  Furthermore, policies must explicitly declare the resources they intend to access; all other resources are blocked by default. Additionally, policies have read-only access to these declared resources.

  The same principle applies to the [audit scanner](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/audit-scanner), which audits the running resources in the cluster.
  Cluster operators can also define the service account used by the audit scanner to perform cluster-wide scans.

> - Describe how the project has addressed sovereignty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Describe how the project has addressed sovereignty.

Kubewarden ensures sovereignty in several key aspects:

- **No vendor lock-in:** Although the core team members are primarily from SUSE, all major project changes are implemented in an upstream fashion. Including a RFC discussion process to define big design decisions that impact the whole project. Kubewarden is designed to run on any Kubernetes distribution, ensuring compatibility with the most common Kubernetes platforms.
- **Interoperability with other projects:** The Kubewarden project prioritizes the use of community-defined standards and projects within its stack. This approach reduces the learning curve and simplifies adoption for users. A prime example is the integration of [OpenReports](https://github.com/openreports) to visualize audit scanner results.
- **User control over data:** Kubewarden leverages open-source solutions, from Kubernetes itself to the storage of policies. This gives users complete control over their data. They can choose to utilize the default resources and storage provided by the Kubewarden team or deploy the project on their own infrastructure. Furthermore, Kubewarden supports operation in [air-gapped environments](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/airgap/install), completely isolated from external networks.
- **Community participation:** Kubewarden actively encourages contributions from individuals beyond the core development team. We provide comprehensive contribution documentation, host monthly community calls, and actively promote the project to attract new community members.
```

Author: Not sure what "sovereignty" means in this context. My answer is about data sovereignty, since the question is part of a technical section.

I could also incorporate what you wrote about community/vendor lock-in if you think it is needed.

Reviewer: Let's keep your text. We can updated it later if necessary.

> - Describe any compliance requirements addressed by the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Describe any compliance requirements addressed by the project.

The Kubewarden incorporates several practices and features to address key compliance requirements and security standards:

- **Secure Supply Chain:** All released assets are signed using Sigstore, and provenance and Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) files are made available.
- **SLSA LVL3 Compliance:** Kubewarden is SLSA Level 3 compliant  for software supply chain security.
- **Guidance for Secure Operations:** There is [documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening/secure-supply-chain) that guides users on how to enforce secure supply chain practices when running Kubewarden.
- **User Control Over Data:** Users have complete control over their data, allowing them to meet potential data residency or sovereignty requirements by choosing their own storage and infrastructure. The support for air-gapped environments further aids in compliance for highly regulated environments.
- **Security Disclosure Process:** There is a [Security Disclosure](https://docs.kubewarden.io/disclosure) process is in place to allow users to report security issues.
- **Secure Development Practices:** The development process requires all code changes to be signed by their authors and reviewed by a peer before being merged into the codebase.
```

Author: I copied and pasted [this answer ](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#project-compliance) from the security self-assessment. 
However, I will be reusing the security links and explanations you provided for the security questions below.

> - Describe the project’s High Availability requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Describe the project’s High Availability requirements.

Kubewarden leverages the inherent High Availability (HA) capabilities of Kubernetes by deploying its core components as standard Kubernetes Deployments. This design allows users to achieve HA through standard Kubernetes mechanisms. To ensure the availability of Kubewarden, users should configure the Kubewarden Deployments (for components like the admission controller and policy servers) with multiple replicas. This ensures that even if one or more instances fail, a minimum number of replicas remain operational, preventing service disruption. Furthermore, Kubewarden provides documentation guiding users on how to further enhance the resilience of their Kubewarden stack using standard Kubernetes features, like: PodDisruptionBudgets, Affinity/Anti-Affinity, Limits and request, etc

[Configuring Kubewarden stack for production \| Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/production-deployments)
[Configuring Policy Server for production](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments)
```

Author: thanks, answer merged

- Describe the project’s resource requirements, including CPU, Network and Memory.
- Describe the project’s storage requirements, including its use of ephemeral and/or persistent storage.

>   The Kubewarden project's application components are stateless. Their storage requirements primarily revolve around ephemeral storage for runtime data processing.

Reviewer 3: Is 'primarily' necessary? I tend to read this as 'most of the time'. Implying that 'some of the time' KW requires non-ephemeral storage. If so, then that should be mentioned. If not so, then remove 'primarily'. The next parts say it's all ephemeral, so I think 'primarily' can be dropped.

  These are independent because the Helm chart version can change due to modifications in the chart itself, without corresponding changes in the Kubewarden components.
  Whenever a major or minor version bump occurs in the `appVersion`, an equivalent version bump is also performed in the Helm chart's `version` field.
  This is documented in our docs in the [upgrade path documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/upgrade-path).
  The release process documentation can be found at [this location](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

  Kubewarden policies follow their own independent lifecycle.
  Their versioning progresses at a pace specific to each policy and is determined on a per-policy basis depending on the changes introduced in each release.

### Installation

- Describe how the project is installed and initialized, e.g. a minimal install with a few lines of code or does it require more complex integration and configuration?

Installation via Helm chart: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#installation

- How does an adopter test and validate the installation?

> The project provides guidande on how to validate the installation via the creation of a policy: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#example-enforce-your-first-policy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The project provides guidance on how to validate the installation via the creation of a policy: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#example-enforce-your-first-policy
```

- Answer more questions than the requirement for your level if it _makes sense for your project_. e.g. if you have documentation covering the different forms of observability in the Day-2 requirements.
- You **CAN** link out to your own project's documentation, but be sure to link to it in a _versioned_ form. e.g. link to it at a specific commit instead of the `main` branch, or versioned website.
- A recorded demo or diagram(s) may be easier to convey some of the concepts in the questions below. You may provide a link to a recorded demo or add architectural diagrams along with your GTR questionnaire.
- If you are unsure or have a question about any section below, **please ask**. Chances are you're not the only one with a question and the template should be updated with additional guidance.

---

# General Technical Review - Kubewarden / Sandbox

- **Project:** Kubewarden
- **Project Version:** 1.24.0
- **Website:** https://kubewarden.io

> - **Date Updated:** 2025-04-24

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Date Updated:** 2025-05-15
```

- **Template Version:** v1.0

> - **Description:** Kubewarden is a Kubernetes Policy Engine. It aims to be the Universal Policy Engine for Kubernetes, simplifying the adoption of 'policy-as-code'.

Reviewer 4: Is there a size limit on the Description field ?
Otherwise we should be more elaborate on the unique values Kubewarden brings
- policy as code
- policy distribution as OCI image
- architecture-independent due to WASM
- ...

## Day 0 - Planning Phase

### Scope

- Describe the roadmap process, how scope is determined for mid to long term features, as well as how the roadmap maps back to current contributions and maintainer ladder?

  Information about Kubewarden's roadmap process is available in the [ROADMAP.md](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/ROADMAP.md) document in the community repository.

  The maintainer ladder is at [MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md).

- Describe the target persona or user(s) for the project?

  The documented target personas for Kubewarden are available at: https://docs.kubewarden.io/personas.

- Explain the primary use case for the project. What additional use cases are supported by the project?

>   Use cases are documented here: https://docs.kubewarden.io/#use-cases

Reviewer 3: It may be better to point directly to the new(ish) use case page at https:/docs.kubewarden.io/use-cases.
And/or the use cases section on the docs introductory page should also have a link to the use-cases page. (Added in PR https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/606/files)

- Explain which use cases have been identified as unsupported by the project.

  See the project's [non-goals](https://docs.kubewarden.io/use-cases#non-goals) in the documentation.

- Describe the intended types of organizations who would benefit from adopting this project. (i.e. financial services, any software manufacturer, organizations providing platform engineering services)?

  Enterprise organizations, startups, SaaS provides, regulated industries, financial services and any organization running Kubernetes at scale.

- Please describe any completed end user research and link to any reports.

>   We are working on a report to be published in the future.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure there is, while people are working on it, there's no timeline.

  2. **Automate CI/CD Pipelines**

  All core repositories use a shared [kubewarden/github-actions](https://github.com/kubewarden/github-actions) toolkit in GitHub Actions to build Wasm modules,
  generate SBOMs, run unit and integration tests, and publish releases, ensuring consistent quality gates and reproducible artifacts across the project.

  3. **Test for Real-World Scenarios**

  Maintain dedicated end-to-end test suites [kubewarden-end-to-end-tests](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests)
  and load-testing benchmarks ([load-tests/results](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/load-tests/results.md)) to validate policy enforcement under realistic cluster loads and edge conditions before every release.

  4. **Community-Driven Roadmap & Governance**

  Track features, issues, and milestones openly in the [Kubewarden GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/kubewarden/projects/6). Propose and review RFCs in [kubewarden/rfc](https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc),
  and [host monthly community meetings](https://teamup.com/ks2bj74dvw132mhjtj).

  5. **Comprehensive, Versioned Documentation**

>   Provide Quickstarts, Tutorials, Howtos, API references, and upgrade guides all pinned to specific releases so users always view documentation matching their software version in [docs.kubewarden.io](https://docs.kubewarden.io).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Provide quick starts, tutorials, howtos, API references and upgrade guides all pinned to specific releases so users always view documentation matching their software version in [docs.kubewarden.io](https://docs.kubewarden.io).
```

- Describe how the project implements Identity and Access Management.

  The project relies on the native Kubernetes [RBAC](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#rbac) feature to control what each component can access.
  Because Kubewarden policies can access resources within the [cluster](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/context-aware-policies), access control is implemented individually for each policy server, which serves as the engine where the policies are executed.
  Therefore, different policy servers running distinct sets of policies can have varying access permissions.
  Furthermore, policies must explicitly declare the resources they intend to access; all other resources are blocked by default. Additionally, policies have read-only access to these declared resources.

  The same principle applies to the [audit scanner](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/audit-scanner), which audits the running resources in the cluster.
  Cluster operators can also define the service account used by the audit scanner to perform cluster-wide scans.

- Describe how the project has addressed sovereignty.

>   The project does not have any specific requirements for data sovereignty.
>   However, the policies can be designed to ensure that sensitive data is not sent outside the cluster or to external services.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The project doesn't have any specific requirements for data sovereignty.
  However, the policies can be designed to ensure that sensitive data isn't sent outside the cluster or to external services.
```

  The policies can also be configured to restrict access to specific namespaces or resources within the cluster.

- Describe any compliance requirements addressed by the project.

  To date, we haven't formally certified Kubewarden to meet any security standards (such as PCI-DSS, COBIT, ISO, GDPR, etc.).

>   However, policies from our catalog can be used for providing certification of other workloads in Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  However, you can use policies from our catalog to provide certification of other workloads in Kubernetes clusters.
```

  See https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md#project-compliance for more information.

- Describe the project’s High Availability requirements.

  Kubewarden leverages the inherent High Availability (HA) capabilities of Kubernetes by deploying its core components as standard Kubernetes Deployments.

>   This design allows users to achieve HA through standard Kubernetes mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This design provides HA through standard Kubernetes mechanisms.
```

  To ensure the availability of Kubewarden, users should configure the Kubewarden Deployments (for components like the controller and policy servers) with multiple replicas.

>   This ensures that even if one or more instances fail, a minimum number of replicas remain operational, preventing service disruption.

Reviewer 3: Too many 'ensures', pehaps.
```suggestion
  This means that even if one or more instances fail, a minimum number of replicas remain operational, preventing service disruption.
```

>   You set `kubewarden-controller` and `audit-scanner`limits and requests using Helm chart values. Default values are here, at [this link](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/b8d8f357d3ae0b677ff7c43582413f24777834e8/charts/kubewarden-controller/values.yaml#L225).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  You set `kubewarden-controller` and `audit-scanner` limits and requests using Helm chart values. Default values are here, at [this link](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/b8d8f357d3ae0b677ff7c43582413f24777834e8/charts/kubewarden-controller/values.yaml#L225).
```

  Kubewarden also offers documentation to help users make their setup more reliable by using common Kubernetes features such as `PodDisruptionBudgets`, Affinity and Anti-Affinity rules, resource limits and requests, and more.

  See [Configuring Kubewarden stack for production](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/production-deployments) and
  [Configuring Policy Server for production](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments).

- Describe the project’s resource requirements, including CPU, Network and Memory.

  Resource requirements vary depending on the number and complexity of policies deployed.

>   `kubewarden-controller` and `audit-scanner`limits and requests are set using Helm chart values, default values can be found here: https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/b8d8f357d3ae0b677ff7c43582413f24777834e8/charts/kubewarden-controller/values.yaml#L225
>   The `policy-server` component's limits and requests can be set by following the documentation at [Production deployments](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  You set `kubewarden-controller` and `audit-scanner`limits and requests using Helm chart values. Default values can be found at [this link](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/b8d8f357d3ae0b677ff7c43582413f24777834e8/charts/kubewarden-controller/values.yaml#L225).
  You can set the `policy-server` component's limits and requests by following the documentation at [Production deployments](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments)
```

- Describe the project’s storage requirements, including its use of ephemeral and/or persistent storage.

>   The Kubewarden project's application components are stateless. Their storage requirements revolve around ephemeral storage for runtime data processing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The Kubewarden project's application components are stateless. Their storage requirements are ephemeral for runtime data processing.
```

>   On startup, each component loads all necessary configuration and sensitive information from Kubernetes ConfigMaps and Secrets, which are mounted as files within the pod.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  On startup, each component loads all necessary configuration and sensitive information from Kubernetes ConfigMaps and Secrets, mounted as files within the pod.
```

>   During runtime, any processed data is temporarily stored within ephemeral volumes, such as `emptyDir` volumes or directly in memory. These storage options are tied to the lifecycle of the pod and are discarded when the pod is terminated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  During runtime, any processed data is temporarily stored within ephemeral volumes, such as `emptyDir` volumes or directly in memory. This storage is discarded when the pod is terminated.
```

>   The project does not have any requirements for persistent storage for its core application components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The project doesn't have requirements for persistent storage for its core application components.
```

  All data needed for operation is either provided through configuration or is transient and managed within the pod's ephemeral storage.

  The Kubewarden policies are stored in [OCI registries as OCI artifacts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/oci-registries-support).

- Please outline the project’s API Design:

  - Describe the project’s API topology and conventions

>     Kubwarden integrates with Kubernetes by providing a set of CRDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Kubewarden integrates with Kubernetes by providing a set of CRDs.
```

>     The CRDs are documented at https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/CRDs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    CRDs documentation is at https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/CRDs.
```

>     The API follows standard Kubernetes extension patterns and it is organzizd in groups and versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The API follows standard Kubernetes extension patterns and it is organized in groups and versions.
```

  - Describe the project defaults

    The default values for a Kubewarden Helm installation are available at https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kubewarden-controller/values.yaml.
    These defaults provide a secure deployment configuration.
    Kubewarden provides the [`kubewarden-defaults`](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#kubewarden-defaults-helm-chart) chart, which deploys a default policy server and optionally includes a set of recommended policies.

    Other key defaults include:

>     - **Default Policy Server**: policies resources without a specified `spec.policyServer` will be automatically assigned to the default policy server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Default Policy Server**: policies resources without a specified `spec.policyServer` are automatically assigned to the default policy server.
```

>     - **Background Audit**: `enabled` by default (policy audit happen in the background to check compliance of existing resources).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - **Background Audit**: `enabled` by default (policy audit happens in the background to check compliance of existing resources).
```

    - **Background Audit**: `enabled` by default (policies are audited in the background to ensure compliance of existing resources).
    - **Default Policy Server Timeout**: 10 seconds is the default timeout for policy server requests.

  - Outline any additional configurations from default to make reasonable use of the project

    Guidance for configuring Kubewarden for production use is available in the [Production deployments](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/production-deployments) and [Configuring Policy Server for production](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments) documentation.
    Recommendations for enhancing security are provided in the [Security Hardening](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening) documentation.

  - Describe any new or changed API types and calls \- including to cloud providers \- that will result from this project being enabled and used

    N/A

  - Describe compatibility of any new or changed APIs with API servers, including the Kubernetes API server

    The Kubewarden API server has no specific compatibility requirements.

>     Features that depend on a particular Kubernetes version are automatically disabled at runtime if the cluster does not meet the required version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Features that depend on a particular Kubernetes version are automatically disabled at runtime if the cluster does not meet the required version.
    Policies that depend on a specific Kubernetes API version (e.g: [deprecated-api-versions-policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/deprecated-api-versions-policy)) declare it as such.
```

>     The project follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) for its releases. Additional details are in the answer for the next question.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    The project follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) for its releases. Additional details are in the answer to the next question.
```

  - Describe versioning of any new or changed APIs, including how breaking changes are handled

    The project follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) for its releases; additional details are provided in the following question.
    For CRDs, the stable version in use is `v1`. In line with Kubernetes conventions, breaking changes to the API trigger a new version, whereas non-breaking enhancements are introduced within the existing version.
    CRDs may also be released as alpha or beta versions before reaching stability.

>     Alpha versions (`v1alphaX`) are considered experimental and may undergo significant changes or be removed entirely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Alpha versions (`v1alphaX`) are experimental and may undergo significant changes or be removed entirely.
```

    Beta versions (`v1betaX`) are more stable, with fewer breaking changes expected, but are still subject to refinement before becoming stable.

  - Describe the project’s release processes, including major, minor and patch releases.

    The main components of the Kubewarden project—`kubewarden-controller`, `policy-server`, `kwctl`, and `audit-scanner`—are always released together, ensuring their major and minor versions remain synchronized.

>     However, the patch version for each component can be incremented independently as needed. The combination of the major and minor version is considered the Kubewarden "stack" version and is used for the `appVersion` field in the released Helm chart.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    However, the patch version for each component can be incremented independently as needed. The combination of the major and minor version is the Kubewarden "stack" version and used for the `appVersion` field in the released Helm chart.
```

>     For each release, the team determines whether the included features and changes necessitate a major or minor version bump and tags the components accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For each release, the team determines whether the included features and changes are a major or minor version bump and tag the components accordingly.
```

>     The Helm chart's `version` field does not follow the same numbering as the `appVersion`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The Helm chart's `version` field doesn't follow the same numbering as the `appVersion`.
```

    These are independent because the Helm chart version can change due to modifications in the chart itself, without corresponding changes in the Kubewarden components.
    Whenever a major or minor version bump occurs in the `appVersion`, an equivalent version bump is also performed in the Helm chart's `version` field.

>     This is documented in our docs in the [upgrade path documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/upgrade-path).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This is documented in our docs in the [upgrade path documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/upgrade-path), and in [RFC-7](https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/blob/main/rfc/0007-kubewarden-versioning.md).
```

Reviewer 3: 'This is documented in the [.....]' is sufficient.

>     The release process documentation can be found at [this location](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The release process documentation is at [this location](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).
```

    Kubewarden policies follow their own independent lifecycle.

>     Their versioning progresses at a pace specific to each policy and is determined on a per-policy basis depending on the changes introduced in each release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Their versioning progresses at a pace specific to each policy and determined on a per-policy basis depending on changes introduced in each release.
```

>     Their versioning progresses at a pace specific to each policy and determined on a per-policy basis depending on changes introduced in each release.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Their versioning progresses at a pace specific to each policy and determined on a per-policy basis, depending on changes introduced in each release.
```

>   The project provides guidance on how to validate the installation via the creation of a policy: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#example-enforce-your-first-policy

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The project provides guidance on how to validate the installation via the creation of a policy: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#example-enforce-your-first-policy.
```

- Describe how the project is installed and initialized, e.g. a minimal install with a few lines of code or does it require more complex integration and configuration?

  Installation via Helm chart: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#installation

- How does an adopter test and validate the installation?

  The project provides guidance on how to validate the installation via the creation of a policy: https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start#example-enforce-your-first-policy

### Security

- Please provide a link to the project’s cloud native [security self assessment](https://tag-security.cncf.io/community/assessments/).

  Security self-assessment: https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/security-self-assesment.md

- Please review the [Cloud Native Security Tenets](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/community/resources/security-whitepaper/secure-defaults-cloud-native-8.md) from TAG Security.

  - How are you satisfying the tenets of cloud native security projects?

    1. **Make security a design requirement**

>        - **Threat-model integration**: The Kubewarden team continuously evaluates the controller and policy server against the Kubernetes SIG Security Admission Control Threat Model to bake security into every release.

Reviewer 3: Don't really like the 'bake' idiom. Just a suggestion, there may be better ways of saying this.
```suggestion
       - **Threat-model integration**: The Kubewarden team continuously evaluates the controller and policy server against the Kubernetes SIG Security Admission Control Threat Model to make security considerations a part of every release.
```

         See the ([Threat Model reference documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/threat-model)) reference documentation.

       - **WebAsembly Sandboxing**: Kubewarden executes policies inside isolated WebAssembly sandboxes.

>          This architecture ensures that policies are confined and cannot interfere with each other or the host system, significantly reducing the attack surface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         This architecture means that policies are confined and can't interfere with each other, or the host system, so reducing the attack surface.
```

>        - **WebAsembly Sandboxing**: Kubewarden executes policies inside isolated WebAssembly sandboxes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **WebAssembly Sandboxing**: Kubewarden executes policies inside isolated WebAssembly sandboxes.
```

>        - **Context-aware policies**: Policies can be designed to only access the resources they need, and they are limited to the permissions granted to the policy server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **Context-aware policies**: Policies can be designed to only access the resources they need, and are limited to the permissions granted to the policy server.
```

>          This ensures that even if a policy is compromised, it cannot access resources outside its intended scope.

Reviewer: Maybe is a good idea to say that policies have read only access to the resources.

>          This ensures that even if a policy is compromised, it cannot access resources outside its intended scope.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
         This ensures that, even if a policy is compromised, it cannot access resources outside its intended scope.
```

    2. **Applying secure configuration has the best user experience**

>        - **Helm Charts with Secure Defaults**: The Kubewarden Helm charts come with secure defaults out-of-the-box, including the `kubewarden-defaults` chart that automatically creates a default poliyserver and installs recommended security policies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **Helm Charts with Secure Defaults**: Kubewarden Helm charts come with secure defaults out-of-the-box, including the `kubewarden-defaults` chart. That chart automatically creates a default policyserver and installs recommended security policies.
```

         TLS is enabled by default for all components, and the `kubewarden-controller` is configured to use a secure service account with limited permissions.

>        - **Clear docs and guides**: Step-by-step Quick Start and "Security hardening" pages ensure that following secure defaults takes no more time than a typical Helm install or kubectl apply.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **Clear docs and guides**: Step-by-step Quick Start and "Security hardening" pages mean that following secure defaults takes no more time than a typical Helm install or kubectl apply.
```

         This includes mTLS with the Kubernetes API server, RBAC, and Security Contexts.

       See the [Security Hardening](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening) and the [Webhooks hardening](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/security-hardening/webhooks-hardening) documentation for more details.

    3. **Selecting insecure configuration is a conscious decision**

       By default the Kubewarden components are deployed with secure defaults.

       For policies the user can:

       - **Allow insecure sources**: Kubewarden enforces secure connections (HTTPS with trusted certificates) when pulling policy artifacts from registries.

>          However, the user can choose to allow connosections to registries using untrusted certficates or even without TLS by [explicitly configuring the policy server to do so](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/custom-cas#insecure-sources).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         However, the user can choose to allow connections to registries using untrusted certificates or even without TLS by [explicitly configuring the policy server to do so](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/custom-cas#insecure-sources).
```

       - **Use the monitor mode**:
         Kubewarden policies operate in two modes: `protect` and `monitor`. By default, policies are deployed in `protect` mode, where they actively enforce rules by accepting, rejecting, or mutating requests.
         The user can choose to deploy policies in `monitor` mode, where they only log the actions they would have taken without enforcing them.

    4. **Transition from insecure to secure state is possible**

       - **Hardening**: The Kubewarden project provides a [Security Hardening](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening) guide that helps users transition from a default secure state to a more secure state.

>        - **Protect mode**: Policies in `monitor` mode can be transitioned to `protect` mode at any time. However, the opposite is not possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **Protect mode**: Policies in `monitor` mode can change to `protect` mode at any time. However, the opposite isn't possible.
```

    6. **Exception lists have first class support**

       - **Policy exceptions**: Users can configure Kubewarden policies to permit exceptions for specific resources or namespaces using `namespaceSelector` and `matchConditions`.
         This allows users to define exceptions without compromising the overall security posture of the cluster.

>        - **Audit scanner exceptions**: Users can confgure the audit scanner to ignore specific resources or namespaces, allowing users to focus on the most critical areas of their cluster.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
       - **Audit scanner exceptions**: Users can configure the audit scanner to ignore specific resources or namespaces, allowing users to focus on the most critical areas of their cluster.
```

       - **TLS Inheritance**: By using TLS for all communications, Kubewarden inherits the security properties of the TLS protocol.
       - **WebAssembly Security**: Policies inherit the security features of WebAssembly, including memory isolation and sandboxing, without needing to implement these protections themselves.

    6. **Exception lists have first class support**

       - **Policy exceptions**: Kubewarden policies can be configured to allow exceptions for specific resources or namespaces using `namespaceSelector` and `matchConditions`.
         This allows users to define exceptions without compromising the overall security posture of the cluster.
       - **Audit scanner exceptions**: The audit scanner can be configured to ignore specific resources or namespaces, allowing users to focus on the most critical areas of their cluster.
       - **Multi-tenancy**: The architecture supports deploying multiple PolicyServers, allowing different security configurations for different workloads or tenants.

>     7. **Secure defaults protect against pervasive vulnerability exploits**

Author: @kubewarden/kubewarden-developers need help on this one, it seems we already have this covered by the other tenets answers.

Reviewer: Good question. Maybe we can mentioned all the answers for the other questions. Maybe add that our workloads run as non-root users. Furthermore, we may mention the development process that can adapt the defaults considering any new vulnerability that we know of.

Reviewer 6: Maybe something along these lines:

```
All the Kubewarden workloads run inside of unprivileged containers.
All the processes are started by a low privileged user within the container.
All the Pods are running with tight security context, read-only filesystem and
no extra capabilities added.
All the container images are based on distroless to reduce the attack surface.
Only the Kubewarden binaries are available inside of the container images.

Each Kubewarden component uses a tailor made Service Account. The privileges of
these Service Account are kept minimal tight to reduce the blast radius in case
of a compromise.
```

    8. **Security limitations of a system are explainable**

>        - **Transparent Architecture**: [The Kubewarden architecture is clearly documented](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/architecture), making security boundaries and assumptions explicit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - **Transparent Architecture**: [The Kubewarden architecture is documented](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/architecture) here, making security boundaries and assumptions explicit.
```

>        - Container images builds are on distro-less bases to minimize the attack surface and contain only the necessary Kubewarden binaries.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
       - Container images are built on distroless bases to minimize the attack surface and contain only the necessary Kubewarden binaries.
```

       - **Threat Model Assessment**: The project maintains a public threat model assessment, increasing transparency about security considerations.
       - **Alternative Recommendations**: When certain security controls aren't possible, Kubewarden documentation provides alternative approaches and recommendations.

> - Describe how each of the cloud native principles apply to your project.

Author: Cannot find "cloud native principles" anywhere.
Both [k0s](https://github.com/k0sproject/k0s/blob/d6313ded3608bba8a6769a3bd0dc86a554fbe2ee/cncf/GTR.md?plain=1) and [KubeVirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/69d061862e0839608932d225a728a7a6e7a89f29/CNCF/general_technical_review.md?plain=1#L224) GTRs do not answer to this.

Reviewer 2: The thought of https://12factor.net/ and similar comes to mind.

Reviewer: Sorry, I did not understand. Haven't you find the "Cloud Native Principles" or how to answer them? If this the former, I found [this](https://github.com/cloud-native-principles/cloud-native-principles/blob/master/cloud-native-principles.md)

Author: @jvanz yes exactly we should ask

Author: asked here  https://github.com/cncf/toc/issues/1673

- How do you recommend users alter security defaults in order to "loosen" the security of the project? Please link to any documentation the project has written concerning these use cases.

  Use case [Allow insecure sources](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/custom-cas#insecure-sources)

- Security Hygiene

>   - Please describe the frameworks, practices and procedures the project uses to maintain the basic health and security of the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Please describe the frameworks, practices, and procedures the project uses to maintain the basic health and security of the project.
```

    **Dependency management**

>     Kubewarden uses Renovatebot to keep dependencies up to date in all the repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Kubewarden has a [Security and dependency policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/SECURITY.md#supported-versions). We use automation tools such as Renovatebot and Updatecli to keep dependencies up to date in all the repositories.
```

> - Describe how each of the cloud native principles apply to your project.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Describe how each of the cloud native principles applies to your project.
```

    **Vulnerability scanning**

    Kubewarden's container images are scanned in ArtifactHub.
    The repositories use GitHub's security features to scan for vulnerabilities in dependencies, alongside language-specific tools like `cargo-audit` for Rust projects and `govulncheck` for Go projects.

    **SLSA 3 compliance**
    Kubewarden is SLSA3 compliant. The project generates SBOMs and provenance attestations for every Wasm module, container image, and Helm chart.

  - Describe how the project has evaluated which features will be a security risk to users if they are not maintained by the project?

>     N/A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    By its architectural design, with Kubewarden policies being Wasm modules run in a Wasm host, Kubewarden ensures that policies can be used safely even in different states of maintainership.
```

- Cloud Native Threat Modeling

  - Explain the least minimal privileges required by the project and reasons for additional privileges.

>   RBAC roles needed by Kubewarden components are documneted at [Security Hardening - RBAC](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#rbac).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  RBAC roles needed by Kubewarden components are documented at [Security Hardening - RBAC](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#rbac).
```

>   Kubewarden is also able to run in a Namspace where the restricted Pod Security Standards are enforced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden is also able to run in a Namespace where the restricted Pod Security Standards are enforced.
```

>   Please refer to the [Security Hardening - Securityy Contexts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#pod-security-standards) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Please refer to the [Security Hardening - Security Contexts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#pod-security-standards) for more information.
```

>   Please refer to the [Security Hardening - Securityy Contexts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#pod-security-standards) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Please refer to the [Security Hardening - Security Contexts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#pod-security-standards) for more information.
```

- Describe how the project is handling certificate rotation and mitigates any issues with certificates.

  Kubewarden has its own certificate rotation mechanism. The CA root and the leaf certificates are both rotated automatically.

>   This is managed by the `kubewarden-controller` component, and it is documented at [Certificate Rotation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#certificate-rotation).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This is managed by the `kubewarden-controller` component, and is documented at [Certificate Rotation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#certificate-rotation).
```

>     By its architectural design, Kubewarden policies being Wasm modules run in a Wasm host. This ensures policy use is safe, even in different levels of maintenance.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    By its architectural design, Kubewarden policies being Wasm modules run in a Wasm host. This ensures policy use is safe, even at different levels of maintenance.
```

>   Manageent is by the `kubewarden-controller` component, and documented at [Certificate Rotation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#certificate-rotation).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Management is by the `kubewarden-controller` component, and documented at [Certificate Rotation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening#certificate-rotation).
```

- Describe how the project is following and implementing [secure software supply chain best practices](https://project.linuxfoundation.org/hubfs/CNCF_SSCP_v1.pdf)

  Kubewarden is SLSA Level 3 compliant. The project generates SBOMs and provenance attestations for every Wasm module, container image, and Helm chart.
  All artifacts are signed with Sigstore’s Cosign and signatures are published alongside attestations. This enables fully automated, end-to-end verification of artifact integrity and origin.
  See [Verifying Kubewarden](https://docs.kubewarden.io/tutorials/verifying-kubewarden) and [the SLSA level 3 blogpost](https://www.kubewarden.io/blog/2024/11/kubewarden-1-18-release-slsa-level-3/) for more details.

>   Also, Kubewarden policies are capable of verifying the signatures of OCI artifacts, via the [Signature Verifier](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/spec/host-capabilities/signature-verifier-policies) capability.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Also, Kubewarden policies can verify the signatures of OCI artifacts via the [Signature Verifier](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/spec/host-capabilities/signature-verifier-policies) capability.
```

### Project Installation and Configuration

- Describe what project installation and configuration look like.

  Installation and configuration are managed using Helm charts.

  A [quick start guide](https://docs.kubewarden.io/quick-start) is available to help users through the initial setup.

  Additional installation and configuration resources include:

  - [Helm chart documentation](https://charts.kubewarden.io/)
  - [Guidance for production deployments](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/production-deployments)
  - [Instructions for configuring Policy Server in production](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/policy-servers/production-deployments)
  - [Security hardening best practices](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/security-hardening)
  - [Air-gapped environment installation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/airgap-installation)

### Project Enablement and Rollback

- How can this project be enabled or disabled in a live cluster? Please describe any downtime required of the control plane or nodes.

  The project can be enabled or disabled by following the [Uninstall process documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/uninstall) instructions.

>   The project can be uninstalled without downtime, as it does not require any changes to the control plane or nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The project can be uninstalled without downtime, as it doesn't require any changes to the control plane or nodes.
```

  In critical situations, operations teams may need to carry out actions that Kubewarden would normally block.
  To support this, Kubewarden offers an [emergency disable procedure](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/emergency-disable) that allows the policy engine to be temporarily turned off.

- Describe how enabling the project changes any default behavior of the cluster or running workloads.

  Kubewarden acts as an [admission controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/), enforcing policies on Kubernetes resources during their creation, deletion and modification.
  As a result, it can intercept and either block or mutate requests to the Kubernetes API server according to the policies defined by the user.

- Describe how the project tests enablement and disablement.

>   Installating and uninstalling Kubewarden is part of the [Kubewarden end-to-end testing suite](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Installing and uninstalling Kubewarden is part of the [Kubewarden end-to-end testing suite](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests/).
```

- How does the project clean up any resources created, including CRDs?

  See the [Uninstall process documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/uninstall) instructions.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

- How does the project intend to provide and maintain compatibility with infrastructure and orchestration management tools like Kubernetes and with what frequency?

  Kubewarden maintains Kubernetes compatibility by following standard Kubernetes patterns.
  It uses the Kubernetes Dynamic Admission Control mechanism, stable v1 APIs, and regular dependency updates to ensure compatibility with the latest Kubernetes versions.

- Describe how the project handles rollback procedures.

>   Kubewarden does not include a dedicated rollback procedure and is intended to support forward-only upgrades.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden doesn't include a dedicated rollback procedure and is intended to support forward-only upgrades.
```

>   While technically possible, reverting to a previous version of the project is not recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  While technically possible, reverting to a previous version of the project isn't recommended.
```

- How can a rollout or rollback fail? Describe any impact to already running workloads.

>   Kubewarden does not support rollback procedures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden doesn't support rollback procedures.
```

  During rollout, potential failure scenarios include infrastructure issues, misconfigurations in the PolicyServer, software bugs, and certificate-related problems.

>   The impact on running workloads is typically minimal: existing validations remain functional because Kubewarden relies on Kubernetes' built-in deployment rollout mechanism,
>   which ensures that the previous version of the application stays available until the new version is fully deployed and verified.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The impact on running workloads is typically minimal: existing validations remain functional because Kubewarden relies on Kubernetes' built-in deployment rollout mechanism. This means
  the previous version of the application stays available until the new version is fully deployed and verified.
```

- Describe any specific metrics that should inform a rollback.

>   The project does not have specific metrics to inform a rollback.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The project doesn't have specific metrics to inform a rollback.
```

  However, the project provides a set of [observability metrics](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/telemetry/metrics-qs) that can be used to monitor the health of the system.

- Explain how upgrades and rollbacks were tested and how the upgrade-\>downgrade-\>upgrade path was tested.

>   At the time of writing, the project has not been tested for downgrade scenarios.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  At the time of writing, the project hasn't been tested for downgrade scenarios.
```

  Upgrade paths are tested with each release through our [end-to-end testing suite](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests/).

- Explain how the project informs users of deprecations and removals of features and APIs.

>   Kubewarden communicates deprecations and removals through release notes, blog announcements, and documentation updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden communicates deprecations and removals through our semantic versioning of specific compoments, release notes, blog announcements, and documentation updates.
```

  The project follows standard Kubernetes conventions for API lifecycle management.
  Additionally, Kubewarden provides a specialized policy that can detect usage of deprecated Kubernetes APIs, helping users identify potential compatibility issues in their configurations.

  For deprecation handling:

  - [Deprecated API Versions Policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/deprecated-api-versions-policy)
  - [Kubernetes Deprecation Guide (For Reference)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide/)

- Explain how the project permits utilization of alpha and beta capabilities as part of a rollout.

>   Kubewarden clearly indicates API maturity through versioning (v1alpha, v1beta, v1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden indicates API maturity through versioning (v1alpha, v1beta, v1).
```

>   Upgrade paths are tested with each release through our [end-to-end testing suite](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Upgrade paths testing for each release is through our [end-to-end testing suite](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-end-to-end-tests/).
```

>   Kubewarden communicates deprecations and removals through our semantic versioning of specific components, release notes, blog announcements, and documentation updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Kubewarden communicates deprecations and removals through semantic versioning of specific components, release notes, blog announcements, and documentation updates.
```

>   Additionally, Kubewarden provides a specialized policy that can detect usage of deprecated Kubernetes APIs, helping users identify potential compatibility issues in their configurations.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Additionally, Kubewarden provides a specialized policy that can detect the usage of deprecated Kubernetes APIs, helping users identify potential compatibility issues in their configurations.
```

  Experimental features typically require explicit opt-in through configuration, allowing users to test new features while being aware of potential instability.

>   Documentation for experimental features, including experimental policies, includes appropriate warnings and limitations, enabling users to make informed decisions based on their risk tolerance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Documentation for experimental features, including experimental policies, has appropriate warnings and limitations, enabling users to make informed decisions based on their risk tolerance.
```

  This flexibility enables developers to use familiar tools and workflows, facilitating testing and integration into CI/CD pipelines and promoting best practices in policy development.

  Kubewarden aims to be the _Universal Policy Engine_ for Kubernetes.

  4. **Observability**

  Kubewarden provides comprehensive observability features, including structured logs, Prometheus metrics, and OpenTelemetry tracing.
  These capabilities enable operators to monitor policy enforcement, detect anomalies, and gain insights into policy-related events within the cluster.

  5. **Auditing**

  The [Audit Scanner](https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/audit-scanner/policy-reports) component continuously evaluates existing resources against defined policies, identifying violations and generating reports.
  This auditing capability ensures ongoing compliance and assists in maintaining the desired state of the cluster.

  6. **Vendor Neutrality**

  Kubewarden is a [vendor neutral](https://contribute.cncf.io/maintainers/community/vendor-neutrality/) project as defined by the CNCF.

>   See https://docs.kubewarden.io/explanations/architecture#design-principles for more details on Kubewarden's architectural principles.

Author: I wrote this section and realized we already outlined design principles in our docs.
We could keep it as it is, or remove the design principles, keeping only the link to our docs.

wdyt?

Reviewer 3: In general, I'd prefer the link. If that's ok for the CNCF.

Author: There is no way to link to our current documentation using the version number. However, I think it's okay to link to the latest documentation, as the documentation is versioned, and we are not linking against a "main branch."
